docs/foundational-concepts/system-thinking-basics/index.mdx, before:

import DocCardList from "@theme/DocCardList";
import { useCurrentSidebarCategory } from "@docusaurus/theme-common";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";

# System Thinking Basics

A practical starter on how to see software as systems: components (the parts), connectors (their interactions), configurations (how parts are arranged), interfaces (the boundaries), and abstractions/encapsulation (how we manage complexity). Use this section to build shared language before diving into styles, patterns, and operations. The goal is to form mental models that help you reason about change, risk, and evolution—not to prescribe a specific stack.

> “A system is more than the sum of its parts.” — Donella Meadows

## How to use this section

- Start with the building blocks in [Components, Connectors, Configurations](./components-connectors-configurations). Learn to separate responsibilities, pick a single primary connector per interaction, and tune runtime levers (timeouts, retries, circuit breakers).
- Define crisp boundaries in [Interfaces & Contracts](./interfaces-and-contracts). Make behavior explicit and testable over time with contract tests, versioning, and clear error models.
- Keep complexity in check with [Abstractions & Encapsulation](./abstractions-and-encapsulation). Expose stable façades; hide implementation details; enforce invariants at boundaries.

## What you’ll gain

- A shared vocabulary to discuss topology, runtime behavior, and change impact.
- Decision cues to choose between sync/async connectors and to calibrate rigor.
- Practical checklists for operability (SLOs, observability), security (authn/z, data), and rollout safety (flags, canaries, rollback).

<Figure caption="A mind map overview of system thinking basics.">
```mermaid title="system-thinking-basics-overview.mmd" showLineNumbers
mindmap
  root((System Thinking Basics))
    Components
      Deployable units
      Responsibilities
    Connectors
      Sync/async
      Protocols
    Configurations
      Topology
      Environments
    Interfaces & Contracts
      Versioning
      Compatibility
    Abstractions & Encapsulation
      Information hiding
      Stable boundaries
```
</Figure>

## Common pitfalls to avoid

- Chatty, tightly coupled calls across components; prefer fewer, well‑designed interactions.
- Treating a shared database as an integration mechanism; use explicit APIs or events instead.
- Leaky abstractions that expose vendor/transport details to consumers.

<DocCardList items={useCurrentSidebarCategory().items} />

## References

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
1. <a href="https://www.systems-thinking.org/" target="_blank" rel="nofollow noopener noreferrer">Systems Thinking: A Primer ↗️</a>
2. <a href="https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-H-Meadows/dp/1603580557" target="_blank" rel="nofollow noopener noreferrer">Donella Meadows, Thinking in Systems ↗️</a>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->

Commit message:

feat(docs): update foundational concepts and programming paradigms documentation
- Added new articles on concurrency, parallelism, and synchronization, as well as latency, throughput, and bandwidth, enhancing the foundational concepts section.
- Reorganized and expanded existing programming paradigms documentation, including detailed explanations and practical examples for each paradigm.
- Introduced a new decision matrix for prioritizing stakeholder concerns in architectural decisions.
- Removed outdated articles and improved clarity and structure across various sections, ensuring a cohesive learning experience.

docs/foundational-concepts/system-thinking-basics/index.mdx, after:

import DocCardList from "@theme/DocCardList";
import { useCurrentSidebarCategory } from "@docusaurus/theme-common";
import Figure from "@site/src/components/Figure";

# System Thinking Basics

A practical starter on how to see software as systems: components (the parts), connectors (their interactions), configurations (how parts are arranged), interfaces (the boundaries), and abstractions/encapsulation (how we manage complexity). Use this section to build shared language before diving into styles, patterns, and operations. The goal is to form mental models that help you reason about change, risk, and evolution—not to prescribe a specific stack.

Systems thinking complements adjacent foundations. When you discuss non-functional outcomes, anchor them to the language of [Quality Attributes](../../quality-attributes). When you reason about latency, failure, and coordination, connect to [Basic Distributed Systems Concepts](../basic-distributed-systems-concepts). Boundary design and compatibility live in [API & Interface Design](../../api-and-interface-design). Day-two concerns—SLOs, telemetry, and alerting—belong in [Observability & Operations](../../observability-and-operations). Confidentiality, integrity, and access control are covered in [Security Architecture](../../security-architecture). This page gives you the mental scaffolding to navigate those deeper sections with intent.

> “A system is more than the sum of its parts.” — Donella Meadows

## How to use this section

- Start with the building blocks in [Components, Connectors, Configurations](./components-connectors-configurations). Learn to separate responsibilities, pick a single primary connector per interaction, and tune runtime levers ([timeouts, retries, backoff](../../reliability-resilience-and-performance-engineering/reliability-patterns/hedging-requests-timeouts-retries), [circuit breakers](../../reliability-resilience-and-performance-engineering/reliability-patterns/bulkheads-circuit-breakers)).
- Define crisp boundaries in [Interfaces & Contracts](./interfaces-and-contracts). Make behavior explicit and testable over time with contract tests, versioning, and clear error models.
- Keep complexity in check with [Abstractions & Encapsulation](./abstractions-and-encapsulation). Expose stable façades; hide implementation details; enforce invariants at boundaries.

## What you’ll gain

- A shared vocabulary to discuss topology, runtime behavior, and change impact.
- Decision cues to choose between sync/async connectors and to calibrate rigor when evolving or integrating systems.
- Practical checklists for operability (SLOs, telemetry, alerting; see [Observability & Operations](../../observability-and-operations)), security (authn/z, data protection; see [Security Architecture](../../security-architecture)), and rollout safety (flags, canaries, rollback).

<Figure caption="A mind map overview of system thinking basics.">
```mermaid title="system-thinking-basics-overview.mmd" showLineNumbers
mindmap
    root((System Thinking Basics))
        Components
            Deployable units
            Responsibilities
        Connectors
            Sync/async
            Protocols
        Configurations
            Topology
            Environments
        Interfaces & Contracts
            Versioning
            Compatibility
        Abstractions & Encapsulation
            Information hiding
            Stable boundaries
```
</Figure>

## Common pitfalls to avoid

- Chatty, tightly coupled calls across components; prefer fewer, well‑designed interactions.
- Treating a shared database as an integration mechanism; use explicit APIs or events instead.
- Leaky abstractions that expose vendor/transport details to consumers.

## Related topics

- [Basic Distributed Systems Concepts](../basic-distributed-systems-concepts)
- [API & Interface Design](../../api-and-interface-design)
- [Quality Attributes](../../quality-attributes)
- [Observability & Operations](../../observability-and-operations)
- [Security Architecture](../../security-architecture)

<DocCardList items={useCurrentSidebarCategory().items} />

## References

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 -->
1. <a href="https://www.systems-thinking.org/" target="_blank" rel="nofollow noopener noreferrer">Systems Thinking: A Primer ↗️</a>
2. <a href="https://www.amazon.com/Thinking-Systems-Donella-H-Meadows/dp/1603580557" target="_blank" rel="nofollow noopener noreferrer">Donella Meadows, Thinking in Systems ↗️</a>
<!-- markdownlint-enable MD033 -->
